==ACT III ==

=== SCENE I Britain. A hall in Cymbeline's palace. ===

[Enter in state, CYMBELINE, QUEEN, CLOTEN,  and Lords at one door, and at another, CAIUS LUCIUS and Attendants]

CYMBELINE
: Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?

CAIUS LUCIUS
: When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet
: Lives in men's eyes and will to ears and tongues
: Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain
: And conquer'd it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,—
: Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less
: Than in his feats deserving it—for him
: And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
: Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
: Is left untender'd.

QUEEN
: And, to kill the marvel,
: Shall be so ever.

CLOTEN
:There be many Caesars,
: Ere such another Julius. Britain is
: A world by itself; and we will nothing pay
: For wearing our own noses.

QUEEN
: That opportunity
: Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
: We have again. Remember, sir, my liege,
: The kings your ancestors, together with
: The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
: As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in
: With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
: With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats,
: But suck them up to the topmast. A kind of conquest
: Caesar made here; but made not here his brag
: Of 'Came' and 'saw' and 'overcame: ' with shame—
: That first that ever touch'd him—he was carried
: From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping—
: Poor ignorant baubles!— upon our terrible seas,
: Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, crack'd
: As easily 'gainst our rocks: for joy whereof
: The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point—
: O giglot fortune!—to master Caesar's sword,
: Made Lud's town with rejoicing fires bright
: And Britons strut with courage.

CLOTEN
: Come, there's no more tribute to be paid: our
: kingdom is stronger than it was at that time; and,
: as I said, there is no moe such Caesars: other of
: them may have crook'd noses, but to owe such
: straight arms, none.

CYMBELINE
: Son, let your mother end.

CLOTEN
: We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as
: Cassibelan: I do not say I am one; but I have a
: hand. Why tribute? why should we pay tribute? If
: Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket, or
: put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute
: for light; else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.

CYMBELINE
: You must know,
: Till the injurious Romans did extort
: This tribute from us, we were free:
: Caesar's ambition,
: Which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch
: The sides o' the world, against all colour here
: Did put the yoke upon 's; which to shake off
: Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
: Ourselves to be.

CLOTEN & Lords            
: We do.

CYMBELINE
: Say, then, to Caesar,
: Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which
: Ordain'd our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar
: Hath too much mangled; whose repair and franchise
: Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed,
: Though Rome be therefore angry: Mulmutius made our laws,
: Who was the first of Britain which did put
: His brows within a golden crown and call'd
: Himself a king.

CAIUS LUCIUS
:                   I am sorry, Cymbeline,
: That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar—
: Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than
: Thyself domestic officers—thine enemy:
: Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
: In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee: look
: For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied,
: I thank thee for myself.

CYMBELINE
: Thou art welcome, Caius.
: Thy Caesar knighted me; my youth I spent
: Much under him; of him I gather'd honour;
: Which he to seek of me again, perforce,
: Behoves me keep at utterance. I am perfect
: That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
: Their liberties are now in arms; a precedent
: Which not to read would show the Britons cold:
: So Caesar shall not find them.

CAIUS LUCIUS
: Let proof speak.

CLOTEN
: His majesty bids you welcome. Make
: pastime with us a day or two, or longer: if
: you seek us afterwards in other terms, you
: shall find us in our salt-water girdle: if you
: beat us out of it, it is yours; if you fall in
: the adventure, our crows shall fare the better
: for you; and there's an end.

CAIUS LUCIUS
: So, sir.

CYMBELINE
: I know your master's pleasure and he mine:
: All the remain is 'Welcome!'

[Exeunt]

=== SCENE II Another room in the palace.===

[Enter PISANIO, with a letter]

PISANIO
: How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not
: What monster's her accuser? Leonatus,
: O master! what a strange infection
: Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian,
: As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevail'd
: On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal! No:
: She's punish'd for her truth, and undergoes,
: More goddess-like than wife-like, such assaults
: As would take in some virtue. O my master!
: Thy mind to her is now as low as were
: Thy fortunes. How! that I should murder her?
: Upon the love and truth and vows which I
: Have made to thy command? I, her? her blood?
: If it be so to do good service, never
: Let me be counted serviceable. How look I,
: That I should seem to lack humanity
: so much as this fact comes to?

[Reading]

: 'Do't: the letter
: that I have sent her, by her own command
: Shall give thee opportunity.' O damn'd paper!
: Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
: Art thou a feodary for this act, and look'st
: So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes.
: I am ignorant in what I am commanded.

[Enter IMOGEN]

IMOGEN
: How now, Pisanio!

PISANIO 
:Madam, here is a letter from my lord.

IMOGEN
: Who? thy lord? that is my lord, Leonatus!
: O, learn'd indeed were that astronomer
: That knew the stars as I his characters;
: He'ld lay the future open. You good gods,
: Let what is here contain'd relish of love,
: Of my lord's health, of his content, yet not
: That we two are asunder; let that grieve him:
: Some griefs are med'cinable; that is one of them,
: For it doth physic love: of his content,
: All but in that! Good wax, thy leave. Blest be
: You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers
: And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike:
: Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet
: You clasp young Cupid's tables. Good news, gods!

[Reads]

:'Justice, and your father's wrath, should he take me
: in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me, as
: you, O the dearest of creatures, would even renew me
: with your eyes. Take notice that I am in Cambria,
: at Milford-Haven: what your own love will out of
: this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all
: happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and your,
: increasing in love,
:          LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.'
: O, for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio?
: He is at Milford-Haven: read, and tell me
: How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
: May plod it in a week, why may not I
: Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio,—
: Who long'st, like me, to see thy lord; who long'st,—
: let me bate,-but not like me—yet long'st,
: But in a fainter kind:—O, not like me;
: For mine's beyond beyond—say, and speak thick;
: Love's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing,
: To the smothering of the sense—how far it is
: To this same blessed Milford: and by the way
: Tell me how Wales was made so happy as
: To inherit such a haven: but first of all,
: How we may steal from hence, and for the gap
: That we shall make in time, from our hence-going
: And our return, to excuse: but first, how get hence:
: Why should excuse be born or e'er begot?
: We'll talk of that hereafter. Prithee, speak,
: How many score of miles may we well ride
: 'Twixt hour and hour?

PISANIO
: One score 'twixt sun and sun,
: Madam, 's enough for you:
[Aside]
:      and too much too.

IMOGEN
: Why, one that rode to's execution, man,
: Could never go so slow: I have heard of
: riding wagers,
: Where horses have been nimbler than the sands
: That run i' the clock's behalf. But this is foolery:
: Go bid my woman feign a sickness; say
: She'll home to her father: and provide me presently
: A riding-suit, no costlier than would fit
: A franklin's housewife.

PISANIO
: Madam, you're best consider.

IMOGEN
: I see before me, man: nor here, nor here,
: Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them,
: That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee;
: Do as I bid thee: there's no more to say,
: Accessible is none but Milford way.

[Exeunt]

=== SCENE III Wales: a mountainous country with a cave.===

[Enter, from the cave, BELARIUS; GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS following]

BELARIUS
: A goodly day not to keep house, with such
: Whose roof's as low as ours! Stoop, boys; this gate
: Instructs you how to adore the heavens and bows you
: To a morning's holy office: the gates of monarchs
: Are arch'd so high that giants may jet through
: And keep their impious turbans on, without
: Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
: We house i' the rock, yet use thee not so hardly
: As prouder livers do.

GUIDERIUS
: Hail, heaven!

ARVIRAGUS
: Hail, heaven!

BELARIUS
: Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill;
: Your legs are young; I'll tread these flats. Consider,
: When you above perceive me like a crow,
: That it is place which lessens and sets off;
: And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
: Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war:
: This service is not service, so being done,
: But being so allow'd: to apprehend thus,
: Draws us a profit from all things we see;
: And often, to our comfort, shall we find
: The sharded beetle in a safer hold
: Than is the full-wing'd eagle. O, this life
: Is nobler than attending for a cheque,
: Richer than doing nothing for a bauble,
: Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:
: Such gain the cap of him that makes 'em fine,
: Yet keeps his book uncross'd: no life to ours.

GUIDERIUS
: Out of your proof you speak: we, poor unfledged,
: Have never wing'd from view o' the nest, nor know not
: What air's from home. Haply this life is best,
: If quiet life be best; sweeter to you
: That have a sharper known; well corresponding
: With your stiff age: but unto us it is
: A cell of ignorance; travelling a-bed;
: A prison for a debtor, that not dares
: To stride a limit.

ARVIRAGUS
:                   What should we speak of
: When we are old as you? when we shall hear
: The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
: In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse
: The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing;
: We are beastly, subtle as the fox for prey,
: Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat;
: Our valour is to chase what flies; our cage
: We make a quire, as doth the prison'd bird,
: And sing our bondage freely.

BELARIUS
: How you speak!
: Did you but know the city's usuries
: And felt them knowingly; the art o' the court
: As hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb
: Is certain falling, or so slippery that
: The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' the war,
: A pain that only seems to seek out danger
: I' the name of fame and honour; which dies i'
: the search,
: And hath as oft a slanderous epitaph
: As record of fair act; nay, many times,
: Doth ill deserve by doing well; what's worse,
: Must court'sy at the censure:—O boys, this story
: The world may read in me: my body's mark'd
: With Roman swords, and my report was once
: First with the best of note: Cymbeline loved me,
: And when a soldier was the theme, my name
: Was not far off: then was I as a tree
: Whose boughs did bend with fruit: but in one night,
: A storm or robbery, call it what you will,
: Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
: And left me bare to weather.

GUIDERIUS
: Uncertain favour!

BELARIUS
: My fault being nothing—as I have told you oft—
: But that two villains, whose false oaths prevail'd
: Before my perfect honour, swore to Cymbeline
: I was confederate with the Romans: so
: Follow'd my banishment, and this twenty years
: This rock and these demesnes have been my world;
: Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid
: More pious debts to heaven than in all
: The fore-end of my time. But up to the mountains!
: This is not hunters' language: he that strikes
: The venison first shall be the lord o' the feast;
: To him the other two shall minister;
: And we will fear no poison, which attends
: In place of greater state. I'll meet you in the valleys.

[Exeunt GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS]

: How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
: These boys know little they are sons to the king;
: Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
: They think they are mine; and though train'd
: up thus meanly
: I' the cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit
: The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them
: In simple and low things to prince it much
: Beyond the trick of others. This Polydore,
: The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
: The king his father call'd Guiderius,—Jove!
: When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
: The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
: Into my story: say 'Thus, mine enemy fell,
: And thus I set my foot on 's neck;' even then
: The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
: Strains his young nerves and puts himself in posture
: That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
: Once Arviragus, in as like a figure,
: Strikes life into my speech and shows much more
: His own conceiving.—Hark, the game is roused!
: O Cymbeline! heaven and my conscience knows
: Thou didst unjustly banish me: whereon,
: At three and two years old, I stole these babes;
: Thinking to bar thee of succession, as
: Thou reft'st me of my lands. Euriphile,
: Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for
: their mother,
: And every day do honour to her grave:
: Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan call'd,
: They take for natural father. The game is up.

[Exit]

=== SCENE IV Country near Milford-Haven.===

[Enter PISANIO and IMOGEN]

IMOGEN
: Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place
: Was near at hand: ne'er long'd my mother so
: To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio! man!
: Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind,
: That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
: From the inward of thee? One, but painted thus,
: Would be interpreted a thing perplex'd
: Beyond self-explication: put thyself
: Into a havior of less fear, ere wildness
: Vanquish my staider senses. What's the matter?
: Why tender'st thou that paper to me, with
: A look untender? If't be summer news,
: Smile to't before; if winterly, thou need'st
: But keep that countenance still. My husband's hand!
: That drug-damn'd Italy hath out-craftied him,
: And he's at some hard point. Speak, man: thy tongue
: May take off some extremity, which to read
: Would be even mortal to me.

PISANIO
: Please you, read;
: And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
: The most disdain'd of fortune.

IMOGEN
: [Reads]  'Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath played the
: strumpet in my bed; the testimonies whereof lie
: bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak surmises,
: but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain
: as I expect my revenge. That part thou, Pisanio,
: must act for me, if thy faith be not tainted with
: the breach of hers. Let thine own hands take away
: her life: I shall give thee opportunity at
: Milford-Haven. She hath my letter for the purpose
: where, if thou fear to strike and to make me certain
: it is done, thou art the pandar to her dishonour and
: equally to me disloyal.'

PISANIO
: What shall I need to draw my sword? the paper
: Hath cut her throat already. No, 'tis slander,
: Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
: Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
: Rides on the posting winds and doth belie
: All corners of the world: kings, queens and states,
: Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave
: This viperous slander enters. What cheer, madam?

IMOGEN
: False to his bed! What is it to be false?
: To lie in watch there and to think on him?
: To weep 'twixt clock and clock? if sleep
: charge nature,
: To break it with a fearful dream of him
: And cry myself awake? that's false to's bed, is it?

PISANIO
: Alas, good lady!

IMOGEN
: I false! Thy conscience witness: Iachimo,
: Thou didst accuse him of incontinency;
: Thou then look'dst like a villain; now methinks
: Thy favour's good enough. Some jay of Italy
: Whose mother was her painting, hath betray'd him:
: Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion;
: And, for I am richer than to hang by the walls,
: I must be ripp'd:—to pieces with me!—O,
: Men's vows are women's traitors! All good seeming,
: By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
: Put on for villany; not born where't grows,
: But worn a bait for ladies.

PISANIO
: Good madam, hear me.

IMOGEN
: True honest men being heard, like false Aeneas,
: Were in his time thought false, and Sinon's weeping
: Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity
: From most true wretchedness: so thou, Posthumus,
: Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men;
: Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured
: From thy great fall. Come, fellow, be thou honest:
: Do thou thy master's bidding: when thou see'st him,
: A little witness my obedience: look!
: I draw the sword myself: take it, and hit
: The innocent mansion of my love, my heart;
: Fear not; 'tis empty of all things but grief;
: Thy master is not there, who was indeed
: The riches of it: do his bidding; strike
: Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause;
: But now thou seem'st a coward.

PISANIO
: Hence, vile instrument!
: Thou shalt not damn my hand.

IMOGEN
: Why, I must die;
: And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
: No servant of thy master's. Against self-slaughter
: There is a prohibition so divine
: That cravens my weak hand. Come, here's my heart.
: Something's afore't. Soft, soft! we'll no defence;
: Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
: The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus,
: All turn'd to heresy? Away, away,
: Corrupters of my faith! you shall no more
: Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
: Believe false teachers: though those that
: are betray'd
: Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
: Stands in worse case of woe.
: And thou, Posthumus, thou that didst set up
: My disobedience 'gainst the king my father
: And make me put into contempt the suits
: Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find
: It is no act of common passage, but
: A strain of rareness: and I grieve myself
: To think, when thou shalt be disedged by her
: That now thou tirest on, how thy memory
: Will then be pang'd by me. Prithee, dispatch:
: The lamb entreats the butcher: where's thy knife?
: Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding,
: When I desire it too.

PISANIO 
:O gracious lady,
: Since I received command to do this business
: I have not slept one wink.

IMOGEN Do't, and to bed then.

PISANIO 
:I'll wake mine eye-balls blind first.

IMOGEN 
: Wherefore then
: Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abused
: So many miles with a pretence? this place?
: Mine action and thine own? our horses' labour?
: The time inviting thee? the perturb'd court,
: For my being absent? whereunto I never
: Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far,
: To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand,
: The elected deer before thee?

PISANIO 
:But to win time
: To lose so bad employment; in the which
: I have consider'd of a course. Good lady,
: Hear me with patience.

IMOGEN 
: Talk thy tongue weary; speak
: I have heard I am a strumpet; and mine ear
: Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
: Nor tent to bottom that. But speak.

PISANIO 
:Then, madam,
: I thought you would not back again.

IMOGEN 
: Most like;
: Bringing me here to kill me.

PISANIO 
:Not so, neither:
: But if I were as wise as honest, then
: My purpose would prove well. It cannot be
: But that my master is abused:
: Some villain, ay, and singular in his art.
: Hath done you both this cursed injury.

IMOGEN 
: Some Roman courtezan.

PISANIO 
:No, on my life.
: I'll give but notice you are dead and send him
: Some bloody sign of it; for 'tis commanded
: I should do so: you shall be miss'd at court,
: And that will well confirm it.

IMOGEN 
: Why good fellow,
: What shall I do the where? where bide? how live?
: Or in my life what comfort, when I am
: Dead to my husband?

PISANIO 
:If you'll back to the court—

IMOGEN 
: No court, no father; nor no more ado
: With that harsh, noble, simple nothing,
: That Cloten, whose love-suit hath been to me
: As fearful as a siege.

PISANIO If not at court,
: Then not in Britain must you bide.

IMOGEN 
: Where then
: Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
: Are they not but in Britain? I' the world's volume
: Our Britain seems as of it, but not in 't;
: In a great pool a swan's nest: prithee, think
: There's livers out of Britain.

PISANIO 
: I am most glad
: You think of other place. The ambassador,
: Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford-Haven
: To-morrow: now, if you could wear a mind
: Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
: That which, to appear itself, must not yet be
: But by self-danger, you should tread a course
: Pretty and full of view; yea, haply, near
: The residence of Posthumus; so nigh at least
: That though his actions were not visible, yet
: Report should render him hourly to your ear
: As truly as he moves.

IMOGEN 
: O, for such means!
: Though peril to my modesty, not death on't,
: I would adventure.

PISANIO 
: Well, then, here's the point:
: You must forget to be a woman; change
: Command into obedience: fear and niceness—
: The handmaids of all women, or, more truly,
: Woman its pretty self—into a waggish courage:
: Ready in gibes, quick-answer'd, saucy and
: As quarrelous as the weasel; nay, you must
: Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek,
: Exposing it—but, O, the harder heart!
: Alack, no remedy!—to the greedy touch
: Of common-kissing Titan, and forget
: Your laboursome and dainty trims, wherein
: You made great Juno angry.

IMOGEN 
: Nay, be brief
: I see into thy end, and am almost
: A man already.

PISANIO 
: First, make yourself but like one.
: Fore-thinking this, I have already fit—
: 'Tis in my cloak-bag—doublet, hat, hose, all
: That answer to them: would you in their serving,
: And with what imitation you can borrow
: From youth of such a season, 'fore noble Lucius
: Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
: wherein you're happy,—which you'll make him know,
: If that his head have ear in music,—doubtless
: With joy he will embrace you, for he's honourable
: And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad,
: You have me, rich; and I will never fail
: Beginning nor supplyment.

IMOGEN 
: Thou art all the comfort
: The gods will diet me with. Prithee, away:
: There's more to be consider'd; but we'll even
: All that good time will give us: this attempt
: I am soldier to, and will abide it with
: A prince's courage. Away, I prithee.

PISANIO 
: Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,
: Lest, being miss'd, I be suspected of
: Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,
: Here is a box; I had it from the queen:
: What's in't is precious; if you are sick at sea,
: Or stomach-qualm'd at land, a dram of this
: Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
: And fit you to your manhood. May the gods
: Direct you to the best!

IMOGEN 
: Amen: I thank thee.

[Exeunt, severally]

=== SCENE V A room in Cymbeline's palace. ===

[Enter CYMBELINE, QUEEN, CLOTEN, LUCIUS, Lords, and Attendants]

CYMBELINE 
: Thus far; and so farewell.

CAIUS LUCIUS
: Thanks, royal sir.
: My emperor hath wrote, I must from hence;
: And am right sorry that I must report ye
: My master's enemy.

CYMBELINE 
:                   Our subjects, sir,
: Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself
: To show less sovereignty than they, must needs
: Appear unkinglike.

CAIUS LUCIUS
:                   So, sir: I desire of you
: A conduct over-land to Milford-Haven.
: Madam, all joy befal your grace!

QUEEN
: And you!

CYMBELINE 
: My lords, you are appointed for that office;
: The due of honour in no point omit.
: So farewell, noble Lucius.

CAIUS LUCIUS
: Your hand, my lord.

CLOTEN
: Receive it friendly; but from this time forth
: I wear it as your enemy.

CAIUS LUCIUS
: Sir, the event
: Is yet to name the winner: fare you well.

CYMBELINE 
: Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
: Till he have cross'd the Severn. Happiness!

[Exeunt LUCIUS and Lords]

QUEEN
: He goes hence frowning: but it honours us
: That we have given him cause.

CLOTEN
: 'Tis all the better;
: Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.

CYMBELINE 
: Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor
: How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
: Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness:
: The powers that he already hath in Gallia
: Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
: His war for Britain.

QUEEN
: 'Tis not sleepy business;
: But must be look'd to speedily and strongly.

CYMBELINE 
: Our expectation that it would be thus
: Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
: Where is our daughter? She hath not appear'd
: Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender'd
: The duty of the day: she looks us like
: A thing more made of malice than of duty:
: We have noted it. Call her before us; for
: We have been too slight in sufferance.

[Exit an Attendant]

QUEEN
: Royal sir,
: Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
: Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord,
: 'Tis time must do. Beseech your majesty,
: Forbear sharp speeches to her: she's a lady
: So tender of rebukes that words are strokes
: And strokes death to her.

[Re-enter Attendant]

CYMBELINE 
: Where is she, sir? How
: Can her contempt be answer'd?

Attendant
: Please you, sir,
: Her chambers are all lock'd; and there's no answer
: That will be given to the loudest noise we make.

QUEEN My lord, when last I went to visit her,
: She pray'd me to excuse her keeping close,
: Whereto constrain'd by her infirmity,
: She should that duty leave unpaid to you,
: Which daily she was bound to proffer: this
: She wish'd me to make known; but our great court
: Made me to blame in memory.

CYMBELINE 
: Her doors lock'd?
: Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear
: Prove false!

[Exit]

QUEEN
: Son, I say, follow the king.

CLOTEN
: That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,
: have not seen these two days.

QUEEN
: Go, look after.

[Exit CLOTEN]

: Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus!
: He hath a drug of mine; I pray his absence
: Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes
: It is a thing most precious. But for her,
: Where is she gone? Haply, despair hath seized her,
: Or, wing'd with fervor of her love, she's flown
: To her desired Posthumus: gone she is
: To death or to dishonour; and my end
: Can make good use of either: she being down,
: I have the placing of the British crown.

[Re-enter CLOTEN]

:How now, my son!

CLOTEN
: 'Tis certain she is fled.
: Go in and cheer the king: he rages; none
: Dare come about him.

QUEEN
: [Aside]            All the better: may
: This night forestall him of the coming day!

[Exit]

CLOTEN
: I love and hate her: for she's fair and royal,
: And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
: Than lady, ladies, woman; from every one
: The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
: Outsells them all; I love her therefore: but
: Disdaining me and throwing favours on
: The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment
: That what's else rare is choked; and in that point
: I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed,
: To be revenged upon her. For when fools Shall—

[Enter PISANIO]

: Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah?
: Come hither: ah, you precious pander! Villain,
: Where is thy lady? In a word; or else
: Thou art straightway with the fiends.

PISANIO 
: O, good my lord!

CLOTEN
: Where is thy lady? Or, by Jupiter,—
: I will not ask again. Close villain,
: I'll have this secret from thy heart, or rip
: Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
: From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
: A dram of worth be drawn.

PISANIO 
: Alas, my lord,
: How can she be with him? When was she missed?
: He is in Rome.

CLOTEN
:                   Where is she, sir? Come nearer;
: No further halting: satisfy me home
: What is become of her.

PISANIO 
: O, my all-worthy lord!

CLOTEN
: All-worthy villain!
: Discover where thy mistress is at once,
: At the next word: no more of 'worthy lord!'
: Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
: Thy condemnation and thy death.

PISANIO 
: Then, sir,
: This paper is the history of my knowledge
: Touching her flight.

[Presenting a letter]

CLOTEN
: Let's see't. I will pursue her
: Even to Augustus' throne.

PISANIO 
: [Aside]                 Or this, or perish.
: She's far enough; and what he learns by this
: May prove his travel, not her danger.

CLOTEN
: Hum!

PISANIO 
: [Aside]  I'll write to my lord she's dead. O Imogen,
: Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!

CLOTEN
: Sirrah, is this letter true?

PISANIO 
: Sir, as I think.

CLOTEN
: It is Posthumus' hand; I know't. Sirrah, if thou
: wouldst not be a villain, but do me true service,
: undergo those employments wherein I should have
: cause to use thee with a serious industry, that is,
: what villany soe'er I bid thee do, to perform it
: directly and truly, I would think thee an honest
: man: thou shouldst neither want my means for thy
: relief nor my voice for thy preferment.

PISANIO 
: Well, my good lord.

CLOTEN
: Wilt thou serve me? for since patiently and
: constantly thou hast stuck to the bare fortune of
: that beggar Posthumus, thou canst not, in the
: course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower of
: mine: wilt thou serve me?

PISANIO 
: Sir, I will.

CLOTEN
: Give me thy hand; here's my purse. Hast any of thy
: late master's garments in thy possession?

PISANIO 
: I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit he
: wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.

CLOTEN
: The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit
: hither: let it be thy lint service; go.

PISANIO 
: I shall, my lord.

[Exit]

CLOTEN
: Meet thee at Milford-Haven!—I forgot to ask him one
: thing; I'll remember't anon:—even there, thou
: villain Posthumus, will I kill thee. I would these
: garments were come. She said upon a time—the
: bitterness of it I now belch from my heart—that she
: held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect
: than my noble and natural person together with the
: adornment of my qualities. With that suit upon my
: back, will I ravish her: first kill him, and in her
: eyes; there shall she see my valour, which will then
: be a torment to her contempt. He on the ground, my
: speech of insultment ended on his dead body, and
: when my lust hath dined,—which, as I say, to vex
: her I will execute in the clothes that she so
: praised,—to the court I'll knock her back, foot
: her home again. She hath despised me rejoicingly,
: and I'll be merry in my revenge.

[Re-enter PISANIO, with the clothes]

: Be those the garments?

PISANIO 
: Ay, my noble lord.

CLOTEN
: How long is't since she went to Milford-Haven?

PISANIO 
: She can scarce be there yet.

CLOTEN
: Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the second
: thing that I have commanded thee: the third is,
: that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my design. Be
: but duteous, and true preferment shall tender itself
: to thee. My revenge is now at Milford: would I had
: wings to follow it! Come, and be true.

[Exit]

PISANIO 
: Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee
: Were to prove false, which I will never be,
: To him that is most true. To Milford go,
: And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow,
: You heavenly blessings, on her! This fool's speed
: Be cross'd with slowness; labour be his meed!

[Exit]

=== SCENE VI Wales. Before the cave of Belarius. ===

[Enter IMOGEN, in boy's clothes]

IMOGEN 
: I see a man's life is a tedious one:
: I have tired myself, and for two nights together
: Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick,
: But that my resolution helps me. Milford,
: When from the mountain-top Pisanio show'd thee,
: Thou wast within a ken: O Jove! I think
: Foundations fly the wretched; such, I mean,
: Where they should be relieved. Two beggars told me
: I could not miss my way: will poor folks lie,
: That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis
: A punishment or trial? Yes; no wonder,
: When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fulness
: Is sorer than to lie for need, and falsehood
: Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord!
: Thou art one o' the false ones. Now I think on thee,
: My hunger's gone; but even before, I was
: At point to sink for food. But what is this?
: Here is a path to't: 'tis some savage hold:
: I were best not to call; I dare not call:
: yet famine,
: Ere clean it o'erthrow nature, makes it valiant,
: Plenty and peace breeds cowards: hardness ever
: Of hardiness is mother. Ho! who's here?
: If any thing that's civil, speak; if savage,
: Take or lend. Ho! No answer? Then I'll enter.
: Best draw my sword: and if mine enemy
: But fear the sword like me, he'll scarcely look on't.
: Such a foe, good heavens!

[Exit, to the cave]

[Enter BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS]

BELARIUS
: You, Polydote, have proved best woodman and
: Are master of the feast: Cadwal and I
: Will play the cook and servant; 'tis our match:
: The sweat of industry would dry and die,
: But for the end it works to. Come; our stomachs
: Will make what's homely savoury: weariness
: Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth
: Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here,
: Poor house, that keep'st thyself!

GUIDERIUS
: I am thoroughly weary.

ARVIRAGUS
: I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.

GUIDERIUS
: There is cold meat i' the cave; we'll browse on that,
: Whilst what we have kill'd be cook'd.

BELARIUS
[Looking into the cave]
: Stay; come not in.
: But that it eats our victuals, I should think
: Here were a fairy.

GUIDERIUS
: What's the matter, sir?

BELARIUS
: By Jupiter, an angel! or, if not,
: An earthly paragon! Behold divineness
: No elder than a boy!

[Re-enter IMOGEN]

IMOGEN 
: Good masters, harm me not:
: Before I enter'd here, I call'd; and thought
: To have begg'd or bought what I have took:
: good troth,
: I have stol'n nought, nor would not, though I had found
: Gold strew'd i' the floor. Here's money for my meat:
: I would have left it on the board so soon
: As I had made my meal, and parted
: With prayers for the provider.

GUIDERIUS
: Money, youth?

ARVIRAGUS
: All gold and silver rather turn to dirt!
: As 'tis no better reckon'd, but of those
: Who worship dirty gods.

IMOGEN 
: I see you're angry:
: Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
: Have died had I not made it.

BELARIUS
: Whither bound?

IMOGEN 
: To Milford-Haven.

BELARIUS
: What's your name?

IMOGEN 
: Fidele, sir. I have a kinsman who
: Is bound for Italy; he embark'd at Milford;
: To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
: I am fall'n in this offence.

BELARIUS
: Prithee, fair youth,
: Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds
: By this rude place we live in. Well encounter'd!
: 'Tis almost night: you shall have better cheer
: Ere you depart: and thanks to stay and eat it.
: Boys, bid him welcome.

GUIDERIUS
: Were you a woman, youth,
: I should woo hard but be your groom. In honesty,
: I bid for you as I'd buy.

ARVIRAGUS
: I'll make't my comfort
: He is a man; I'll love him as my brother:
: And such a welcome as I'd give to him
: After long absence, such is yours: most welcome!
: Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst friends.

IMOGEN 
: 'Mongst friends,
: If brothers.

[Aside]

: Would it had been so, that they
: Had been my father's sons! then had my prize
: Been less, and so more equal ballasting
: To thee, Posthumus.

BELARIUS
: He wrings at some distress.

GUIDERIUS
: Would I could free't!

ARVIRAGUS
: Or I, whate'er it be,
: What pain it cost, what danger. God's!

BELARIUS
: Hark, boys.

[Whispering]

IMOGEN 
: Great men,
: That had a court no bigger than this cave,
: That did attend themselves and had the virtue
: Which their own conscience seal'd them—laying by
: That nothing-gift of differing multitudes—
: Could not out-peer these twain. Pardon me, gods!
: I'd change my sex to be companion with them,
: Since Leonatus's false.

BELARIUS
: It shall be so.
: Boys, we'll go dress our hunt. Fair youth, come in:
: Discourse is heavy, fasting; when we have supp'd,
: We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story,
: So far as thou wilt speak it.

GUIDERIUS
: Pray, draw near.

ARVIRAGUS
: The night to the owl and morn to the lark
: less welcome.

IMOGEN 
: Thanks, sir.

ARVIRAGUS
: I pray, draw near.

[Exeunt]

=== SCENE VII Rome. A public place. ===

[Enter two Senators and Tribunes]

First Senator
: This is the tenor of the emperor's writ:
: That since the common men are now in action
: 'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
: And that the legions now in Gallia are
: Full weak to undertake our wars against
: The fall'n-off Britons, that we do incite
: The gentry to this business. He creates
: Lucius preconsul: and to you the tribunes,
: For this immediate levy, he commends
: His absolute commission. Long live Caesar!

First Tribune
: Is Lucius general of the forces?

Second Senator
: Aye.

First Tribune
: Remaining now in Gallia?

First Senator
: With those legions
: Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
: Must be supplyant: the words of your commission
: Will tie you to the numbers and the time
: Of their dispatch.

First Tribune
::                   We will discharge our duty.

[Exeunt]

